# Cophylogenetics\_mycorrhizal-symbioses

Code for the study "Questioning the Evidence for Host-Symbiont Codiversification in Mycorrhizal Symbioses"

This repository includes the R code used to perform cophylogenetic analyses on the mycorrhizal associations described in Perez et al. 2022 and the R code used to perform cophylogenetic analyses on the mycorrhizal associations described in 12 other studies. Each code has several parts: formatting data, evaluating cophylogenetic signal by performing global-fit methods (parafit and PACo), evaluating phylogenetic congruence by performing the event-based method eMPRess (which requires to format data, to perform it in a Bash script and to recover results). Each part of the code has been applied to each mycorrhizal network.

This repository also includes the Bash code used to assessed phylogenetic congruence with the event-based model eMPRess in the mycorrhizal associations described in Perez et al. 2022 and in the mycorrhizal associations described in 12 other studies. eMPRess reconciles the plant and fungal phylogenetic trees using maximum parsimony to model events of cospeciation, host transfer, duplication, and loss, with a given cost associated to each event. We ran eMPRess with the following costs: 0 for a cospeciation event, 4 for a duplication event, 1 for a loss event, and 1 for a transfer event.

For each mycorrhizal network, if the phylogenetic trees were not already available, we retrieved representative DNA sequences for both plant and mycorrhizal fungi. This repository includes the script used to align them with MAFFT (Katoh, 2002) and trimAl (Capella-Gutiérrez et al., 2009), and reconstruct the phylogenetic tree with IQ-TREE (Nguyen et al., 2015).

This repository also includes data for each network: the tree files of fungi and plants and the associated mycorrhizal network. Most of the trees are denoted by "alignment\_Name\_fungi/plant\_trimal.fasta.treefile" because they have been generated thanks to alignement of fasta sequences with MAFFT and trimAl. Support for the nodes of the trees are included in the treefile files (with a Newick format). The alignments used to reconstruct the trees are also included. The plant tree called "plant\_tree\_Name" were obtained thanks to V.PhyloMaker2. Some fungi trees are called "tree\_backbone\_Name" because they were improved by a backbone approach. The alignments used for this backbone reconstruction are denoted "alignment\_all\_fungi\_trimal.fasta". The networks are either in csv format or under a format ready for eMPRess analysis ("links\_empress\_Name.txt").

